>>First off since you have choose to
come to this session today instead of one
of the other very interesting ones happening simultaneously
we suspect that you, like us, believe that performance
of your applications is a very important and key
part of how you actually create those applications.
First and foremost because, well, nobody likes to
sit around and wait for their computer to compute;
they actually want to really be doing productive work.
There're also obviously a lot of smaller
and more subtle details like the fact
that humans actually work more efficiently and better
if after they click on a button like a real button
in the real world it responds immediately to
their actions and doesn't have a noticeable delay.
That's also a performance issue or also when you think about
it as you optimize your code and make it run faster you sort
of squish down the amount of time it takes to
execute you'll give yourself additional head room
where the processor isn't doing anything that you can use
in order to provide additional features to your application.
To give a basic example several years back everyone
started doing background spelling check in word processors
because they had the head room in order to do
that and finally if you are running an application
like a game well you know you can always use more
performance because you can use that additional performance
in order to provide, you know, higher frame rates,
additional quality and detail to your graphics and so on.
Well there's another way to look at performance
as well in that it's very economical.
Now once you've optimized your software and crunched it down
so to do a certain fixed amount of work it requires lessons
and fewer instructions and so on; well if you think
about it this actually means it's taking less power to do
that same amount of work and if you have to do that work in
a finite amount of time you'll be able to use less hardware,
smaller system, fewer systems and so on to do
that same amount of work in your fixed time
and in the real world this means that say, you know,
with portables well you'll be able to do more work
on a battery charge if you're running optimized code or in
the server space well, you know, to do that fixed amount
of work and provide your customers with a certain level of
service for their application well you'll be able to do it
with fewer servers in your rack which take up less
space and less power in your expensive server farms.
Okay, so how do we get optimized code?
Well, you know, as developers I'm sure you're
all quite familiar with the programming cycle.
You write your code, you build it, you test and well if
you're like me you haven't done it perfect the first time
so something goes wrong, you go back
around and you fix it and go through again.
Well of course in reality we don't just simply say, "Well
it failed and oh gee, maybe I should try doing something."
No, what we really do is we go in and we
apply debugger such as say GVD built an X code
so it can tell us exactly where we failed.
We failed at say function foo line 25 and not
just well it crashed somewhere in general.
Also we can do auxiliary things like
say displaying the programs state
around where we have our crash and so on as well.
So, performance semi-cycle is actually
very similar to this process.
Now we're still going around the same loop of writing our
code, building it, testing it only now instead of crashing
and failing well our users will come back and say, "this
is to slow, I really want it to be faster, you know,
I'm getting tired of waiting for my computer."
You know, we could in theory go in and manually tune and
optimize this but unfortunately it's even more difficult
to close this loop manually than it is with
the original just fixing your bugs loop
because well first off do you even have a clue as to where
you might want to go in and do your performance tuning,
you have to have pretty intimate knowledge of the
code and probably only the person who wrote it
or someone who's worked with them very closely would have
even a clue as to where to start and secondly it's real easy
to become side tracked and your intuition, your intuition
tells you to go in and look at one part of the code
but actually it's something which you weren't even thinking
about in another part of the code which is a real problem
and it's way to easy to get caught in a situation.
You can spend a couple of weeks trying to optimize and
really beat the heck out of one portion of your code
that you think is really the problem only to
have your coworker come in and go, "Sorry,
these were not the functions you're looking for."
So as a result, what you want to do is
use a tool to actually help you focus
in on your activity and that's what we have in Shark.
Shark is effectively a performance debugger to tell
you that which part of your program is slowest;
foo 25 is the slow part of your program;
that's where you should go in and optimize.
So, effectively when you think about it what
Shark helps you do is it helps you go in
and find the performance bottle necks in your code and
it does this by as you're running your code it goes in
and measures and analyzes, it pokes and
prods your program to see what it's doing
and gets this information and presents it back to you.
As it's presenting it back it might also give you some
hints on how to optimize and what you might want to look
at in your program and we really think that this
is a great and optimal performance tool solution.
First off because it's really easy.
I'll be able to show you basically how to use Shark in just
a few slides here coming up next and once we've taken this
and analyzed your program in a very easy manner it
presents the information acquired with very simple
and straight forward graphical interface displays
instead of saying making you go through reams
and reams of textual output like you
would say with something like gprof.
Now once you've started to use Shark for a
while you realize that it's also quite powerful.
It offers many different analyzing profiling techniques
you can use to go in and look at your application
in a wide variety of ways in order to look at different
types of performance issues you may encounter.
In each one of these options has many different
configuration options to go and play with it in order
to fine tune it to look at just
your issues that you may have.
Also it works seamlessly with both 32
and 64 bit applications so you can look
at any application you might write for Leopard.
So, I just said Shark was easy to use;
well here let me try to prove it to you.
In order to actually use Shark well, the first thing
you want to do is debug your program because trying
to actually fix performance problems when your program
is still crashing is usually kind of pointless.
Then once you've got your program
working well you want to go in
and set the build options like you're planning to release.
You want to get all the optimization
flags at the full optimization and so on.
So, you're looking at just as your users will
look at your code with one big exception.
You want to make sure you have all the symbols
enabled in the code and you're not stripping anything
out because you actually want to
build and use that information
to allow Shark to tell you where to go in and look.
So, now that we've got this what you want to do is
get ready to run your program and when you do you want
to choose the part you reprogrammed, you
want to optimize at any point in time.
You know, do you want to speed up the
response to button clicks on your interface?
Do you want to improve the wait times
when you're doing long computation?
Do you want, if you're a game, do
you want to increase the frame rate
or do you want to go for higher resolution graphics?
You know, what is your measurement?
And once you've got this go in and take a base line
measurement so you kind of have a place to start;
this is where we're starting our measurement; we
want to try and improve it and you know, you want,
a key part of this is you need to build,
take this measurement in a repeatable manner
which can sometimes be very difficult if it's something
that's very user interface intensive because you don't want
to take different measurements just depending on
how fast a person actually clicked on their mouse
and once you got this picked out you can go ahead and
use Shark on your program while it's running, you know,
to analyze it and to do Shark; well when you start
it up this little window which I can fit on a slide
and actually have to magnify to make it look like it's
filling up a slide, control is really you need to use
to get going and what you'll need to do is first
pick a way for Shark to look at your program
and there are several methods and we'll
talk about several of these here today.
Once you've picked a sample configuration from this list,
you go in and figure out how you
want to aim Shark at your program.
Do you want to just have Shark slurp up what's happening
in the entire system while it's going and executing
and you know it can do this and this is
actually surprising useful in many cases.
You can say, "Look at how you're interacting with
other applications with the system and so on"
but you might also want to go in and focus it on say just
your application or you know, have it actually it can go in
and start an executable file and look
at your file starting from binary disk.
Now once you've told Shark what you want to
look at well pull the trigger, press start.
It'll be off and running and doing
some measurements of your application.
Alternatively you can use option escape the hot key listed
right here above start which will allow you to do this
without actually touching your mouse
and you can actually change this hot key
to be anything you want should this a
problem with your particular program.
So, you're on your way and after a little while later you
can just press this button again, it changes conveniently
to stop or similarly use option escape to stop
and you'll stop Shark's measurement
and it can start its analysis phase.
Alternatively Shark will also stop automatically
after a preset time limit by default.
Now once you've got all this information collected
and ready to go well, boom, up pops this window all
at once containing a very concise summary of what happened
in your application during the time it was measured
and pointing you right at the area
you want to optimize first.
We'll talk more on how to interpret this in just a moment.
So, what you can see here is in just a few slides I
was able to show you that how to use Shark essentially.
So basically it's real easy to use but it can give you a lot
of data really fast and this is...so the real key is trying
to get Shark to focus in on the key data of importance
to you and so the data it produces is really useful
and so the rest of this talk we're going to go in and
try to give you a basic tutorial on how you might want
to choose the analysis options from the analysis
options menu and how to go in and focus it in on the part
of your program that's of most interest to
you in order to allow you to actually see
and measure just those items of interest.
So, expanding upon this a bit what we're
going to do is we're going to show you how
to use Shark to examine a variety of issues.
First is your basic CPU bound job, you just need
to speed up something that's processor bound
and for this we use a time profile technique.
Another common thing you may face is dealing with how
your application deals with Mac OS 10 and how it interacts
and for this we suggest the system trace tool.
If you have a multi threaded application and are
concerned with how the different threads are interacting
with each other we would also let you consider the system
trace or you might want to consider a slight variation
on time profile called all thread states.
We have a Malloc trace for memory allocation
issues, a variety of options for Java tracing
and if you are encountering actual
problems with how your application interacts
with the hardware below it well we allow access
to the actual hardware performance counters
and OS performance counters in order to see what's really
working on a low level and then to wrap up we're going to go
in and look at how to actually go in and aim Shark at
your code, going beyond just the start and stop buttons
which I showed you here a moment ago and at the several
other ways you control how Shark is pointed directly
at issues that may be of interest to you.
So, for the first part here I'm going to go
and talk about how we can use Shark to look
at CPU bound jobs using the time profiling technique.
So, first off just how would we really
want to address a CPU bound job,
for those of you who don't have
experience with performance tuning?
Well to give a quick example, let's say we have an
application here where we're currently spending 100%
of our time for the key area of interest doing some activity
and so we say that's our time baseline and we're just going
to call it, however many seconds, going to call it 100%.
Well the first thing you really want to do in order
to do performance optimization is we don't want
to simply see this block of time, we want to actually
see what was happening; so this is where Shark comes in.
It takes this time and breaks it down and shows what code
was actually executing over the duration of this time
so we can see all the different parts of what that time was
actually consisting of and the key thing you should see take
from this graph is that, "Well hey, we're spending half of
our time in function foo; this is probably the best place
for us to spend our time and going and optimizing
because we'll get the most bang for our buck."
So just to give a quick example let's say we go
in and look at the, and interloop of function foo
and spending a long time on that interloop.
So we can go in and look at that loop and if we go in and
optimize it, let's say we manage to get a 5 times speed
up by looking at this little bit of code on foo.
We'll just by going in and tweaking one little
bit of code here we can cut the amount of time
that our application has taken during this area of interest
down almost in half, with one little application of Shark.
Now of course what'll typically happen here is that your
boss will say, "Oh great, well it's still not fast enough.
You should optimize some more."
So then what you can do is look at your application again
and what you'll see here is that the second bar has popped
up and it's now the biggest because we've pushed down
the first one so far and you know I actually like to kind
of compare those to the game of whack a mole.
If you've ever gone to the arcade and you know,
seen the little moles popping out of the hole
and you take the big huge hammer and you go and
beat them down and of course as soon as you beat one
down the next one pops up and you go
and beat it down and so on and so forth.
Well performance optimization is the same
way; you beat one down the next one pops
up and is your next challenge to go after.
So let's say we're able to go in and tune an interloop
here on bar and we manage to beat that one down as well
and well you can see here now just by going in
and tuning a couple of interloops in our program
which Shark basically pointed us at we're able to get a two
and a half times performance speed up on this application
without even looking at the rest of
the code or working with it in any way.
Now you can continue on this path ad infin item,
you know, continue to try to get better performance
but at some point either your product will ship or you'll
get tired of this; your boss will say, "You know, hey,
that's good enough; we're fast enough" and usually by this
point in time what you get is a distribution more like this
where you have a variety of functions that are more or less
equal because you've beaten down all the big heavy hitters
and so it becomes more of an issue of going in and
picking out which ones are the easiest to optimize
but still even looking at something like this
picking from one among three functions to maybe look
at optimizing it's much better than, say, to have to look
over the hundreds you may have in your entire program.
So, how does Shark actually allow us
to go in and see inside our program
and actually get this information to
see where we want to go and optimize.
Well what Shark does is it goes in and takes periodical
samples of our program execution; so over the course of time
as our application executes Shark will go in and peek in
and see what we're doing on an even rate and it's going
to see everything that our application
is doing; there's no hiding from it here.
It's going to see the kernel time, drivers, you name it;
whatever is happening it's going to peek in there and see it
and it can do this with a configured
goal and variable sample rate.
By default we start with a thousand samples a second
because that works pretty well for most applications
but you can change it if you want if your application
needs a higher resolution or lower resolution sampling
and then at each sample point we
actually don't do very much work.
All we do is we go in and slurp out the call stack of what
your program is actually doing at that particular point
in time and a few other bits of information such as the
program counter of where the processor is executing,
processor thread IDs, and a couple of other
numbers and we do this on all the processors
in the system for today's multi processors systems.
So, this had a lot of key advantages.
First and most importantly it has
very low system overhead in order
to get the amount of information we're actually getting.
If you actually look at a whole system trace
with Shark you can see that its impact on the CPU
with typical sample rates is usually less
than 1% of the CPU load; very little factor.
Similarly in order to record a typical length
traces of maybe 30 seconds, a mi0nute or so on,
what it actually only requires a few megabits
of RAM in order to store all this information
and in today's multi gigabyte system this a kind
of a drop in the bucket and not really a big deal.
So a key factor to think about all this is that
Shark does not affect your results and with any sort
of performance optimization tool this is very important
because much as with you know, particle physics, you know,
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle says
"you know our measuring tool can actually affect what
we're measuring and make our measurement invalid."
This is also a very applicable
to performance analysis tools.
You don't want to end up measuring what your performance
analysis tool did you want to measure your application
and so Shark gets out of the way and lets
you measure your application and not Shark.
Now going even a step further in this, sort of a
corollary is that Shark doesn't require you to instrument
or adjust your code or screw it up in any
way in order to take your measurements.
No code modifications are required in order to use
Shark; there are a few optional ones you can add
but in most cases you won't need to modify your code
in any way and this even goes to the compilation stage;
you don't need to recompile with any special
options such as say with gprof you have
to actually add additional code to get your information
from that and as a result sort of an interesting thing
about Shark is that even end users can Shark your
application with their own data sets after it's
out in the field and subsequently
send this data back to you.
Now I'll talk a little bit more about this a little later.
So one final issue here which is of key importance;
it's one of our key differences from Xray if you went
to that talk yesterday is that Shark can get the
execution profile down to the program counter level;
we can tell you the exact instructions you're
working on and we're able to use that information
to really aim you in exactly where you want to optimize.
Now of course all these great advantages do come
with some disadvantages but really they're not
that bad when you really think about them.
So if we have some execution going along here, our main
function is running and it's (inaudible) is very small foo
and bar functions popping up and then at the white
points, white lines where we're actually sampling;
so what Shark will see when it samples
this is actually this measurement instead
which looks quite a bit different
and for a couple of reasons.
Over here on the left side well the foo and
bars are falling between our sample points
so we're just missing them completely;
we're not getting them at all.
Over on the right side in contrast the foo and bar
functions are falling right on the sample lines
and so we're getting them and thinking
that they're larger than they actually are.
Now the nice effect about this is that statistically
speaking when you look over a large enough set of samples
which for a typical function is if
you get more than 10 or 20 samples
in a function that's usually statistically significant
is that these 2 effects will average out over time
and therefore for all the important heavy hitter functions
in your program these problems will essentially
completely cancel out and be meaningless.
Okay, so we've established how Shark can actually
get this information, well how can we get that how
that time is breakdown and feed it back to you?
Shark is going to take all these samples
and it's going to grab all of the functions
where we were executing off the top of the stack,
leaf functions and it just with those it's going to go
and compile the exact graph that I showed you before,
showing exactly where we were executing over the span
of time while we were taking these samples broken
down into the various functions we were executing.
Now we can take this and this looks
really good for 5 samples.
In the real world of course you're going to have a lot more
samples and probably a whole lot more functions than just 3
so what we do in order to make this readable is we take this
graph we tilt it over on it's side and then we present it
in this textual format but it's the same thing; what
you're seeing is instead of the big heavy hitters going
over to the left is they're just coming up to the top
and being right there obvious and so effectively just
with this one window we're telling you that, "Hey,
optimize this; you can ignore these down at the bottom."
Now, this view is what we call the heavy
view; it shows you the leaf functions,
the functions that are actually executing code.
It's usually the best place to start your
analysis of your program for the simple reason
in that it answers the question, you
know, what code is actually giving?
What code should I look at...and effectively
what we're doing though if you really step back
and think about this is we're providing
sort of a bottom up view of your code.
We're starting from the codes actually
executing at the bottom of the call stack,
the leaf functions and then going back up.
You can see up here in the upper part I've actually
opened up some of these little disclosure triangles
that appear next to the function name so we
can actually see the call stacks backing up.
Now this is really great for going and finding out
say an interloop which is executing all the time
but sometimes it's not always what you want.
So in other cases what you may actually
want to do is go in and look at your code
and at the samples in more of a top down fashion.
Shark can handle this as well.
What we can do is take your call stacks and we can walk
them down starting from the bottom and build up a whole tree
of what is being executed and what
is being called by other functions.
Once we've built up this call stack tree
well we then can go in and see patterns
on how these different calls are related to each other.
For example, in this case well we're calling
square root here in 2 completely different ways
through 2 completely different code paths and as a result
we may want to optimize those 2 different code paths
in 2 completely different ways; even assuming that we can't
actually optimize inside this square root function itself.
So basically what we're answering here is how do we reach
executing code in case we want to consider, you know,
backing up a level or 2 in the tree and optimizing a higher
level function instead of down, clear down to the bottom.
So in order to present this again we present it in sort
of the textual format, the kind of columnar chart format
and this looks exactly the same as what you saw before
except we've just simply flipped over everything
so now the start function is up a the top; we go
to underscore start main and then we branch off
into the various functions that occurring.
This is a very simple little program which nicely,
but a real one, which nicely fits on a slide
but with your programs it looks very similar.
So even using the little menu in the lower right
hand corner there we can choose between those 2
or hey we can split the difference look at them both side
by side and do some comparing contrast with the heavy view
up on top, the tree view down in the bottom and
see, we can look at our code both ways at once.
Okay, well for a little simple toy
example like what I can show you
in this particular session, you know, this looks great.
We can just look at the whole tree; see
all the patterns right there, no problem.
Of course with the real application which may have
hundreds of thousands of functions well the tree can get
so big that it can be really hard to follow.
So we need to simplify this down.
Shark can help us out here too.
What we can simply do is eliminate parts of the tree.
For example lets say we want to go in and eliminate all the
math library calls; you know this is code supplied to you
from apple; it's not like you're going to be able to
go in and optimize the internal guts of square root
because we haven't provided you with the source.
So by eliminating those what you'll typically want
to do is not just simply throw them out completely
but take their samples and move them up into
the your function which is calling them;
so therefore it's basically telling you that, "hey I want
to look at my function that's calling them because I want
to try to optimize like the number
of times I'm calling those functions
which is a place I can actually
make an adjustment to the program."
Once we do that now you'll see we have a much
simpler and easier to read tree without the stuff
which we can't actually have any control over and we
can now see the appropriate waiting of all the functions
that we do have control over and this is just one simple
example of what we call Shark's data mining options
which can go in and allow you to simplify these
large complicated sets of potential call trees
by doing things like, the example here,
I charged the library to the caller;
it can completely chop off tree branches which he just
knows are not of interest to you and any other possibilities
and then going with Shark's ethos of a fairly simple
GUI user interface in order to do this all you need
to do is select a function in a browser window, go up to the
data mining menu at the top and choose one of these options
and it'll immediately start chopping off the
functions that aren't of interest to you.
Now there's a second way as well in that at any
point in time you can go up to the window menu
and choose show advance settings and this little
drawer will pop out of the side of the window
Now in this little drawer I have highlighted the area
summarizing all the call stack information which you can go
and do pretty much the same operation you can from the menu.
There are also other controls in here too and basically they
control various ways that Shark is displaying information
in the browser to allow you to customize that display
to highlight the areas that are of interest to you
and the controls in this drawer are actually very similar
over the course of time depending on what you're looking
at in order to provide you with the options that could be
helpful with that particular view and we'll actually talk
about a few more of these options
over the course of the talk.
Okay, so the browser view profile heavy are
the most common ways to look at your code.
There are other ways too; for example
we have what is called the chart view.
It kind of gives you an overview of the code; it graphically
displays all the samples in our code on the basis
of call stack depths; that's what the height of each bar is
and what you can see here is very much how your program
changes over time and in many programs we may measure
or sort of steady state for the time of
measurement and doing pretty much the same thing
but if you're actually doing multiple
different things over the course
of time the chart view can make them very obvious.
For example, we can see over here on the left
we're doing what looks like one thing and over here
on the right well this looks completely
different and then in the middle we have kind
of these big funny red spikes popping up; so, you
know, maybe we want to know what the heck are those;
so we can go in and actually go in and magnify the
interesting sections using this little slider at the bottom
which controls the magnification
factor on the display and go in
and zero in on those interesting
parts that we want to look at.
So in this case we want to go in and zero in
on this red big spike which is the left one
of the two you just saw in order
to see what that really was.
So we can magnify it and we can go in and if you
actually click on the graph what will happen is over here
on the right side we'll show you the call stack
from that particular sample that was taken for you
and as a result we can see just from looking
and examining this call stack that, "Oh, okay,
these 2 big red spikes are getting a lot of VM
under square functions, virtual memory functions,
we were allocating a whole bunch of memory here
and the kernel actually mapping those
pages in for us so we could use them."
You can also go in and double click
on the various samples here to go in
and go back to the profile exactly where you were.
Now everything I've shown you so far has basically
allowed you to see down to say the function level
but as I mentioned before, well sampling
allows you to see down to the instruction level
where you were executing, what you might want to optimize.
How can we show you that?
Well, it's really simple.
We'll go beyond those function names, just come in double
click anywhere in the source name, the window changes.
What it does is it shows you the code which
is executing and not only are we going
to show you the code here we've also color coded it.
So you can see here that the code which is actually
executing the most has been color coded to,
in these hot colors so you can see that,
"Hey, this is where you should look.
This particular line of code is what you should optimize"
and if you happen to have multiple of these spots scattered
about your function well over here in the scroll
bar you can see this isn't quite your typical run
of the mill scroll bar; it actually has the
coloring extended out and on to the scroll bar
so you can grab the thumb and just simply move
to these different yellow points and to see all
of the different hot spots in your function.
Now once you pick out the part you want to go in and you
thought of all of it, "Hey, I think I can optimize this
in a new way" and you can pick that spot and go in and
press the edit button, take you right back to your editor
and you can start the cycle of optimization again.
So, now that's the way code browser usually works.
Now there are some cases you'll try double
clicking and this will come up instead.
You'll see a bunch of assembly code from your code and
it'll happen if you say double click on a library function,
any sort of kernel function, or if your end users
try to Shark your code and they double click
on anything this is what they'll tend to see or you may just
simply, you know, switch over; you can actually bounce back
and forth and look at both source and assembly if you like
and even in this view we can offer
a lot of useful information
We can offer you optimization hints simply by
clicking on these little exclamation point buttons
which can tell you how you might want to consider optimizing
that code, even on an instruction by instruction level
or potentially give hints to the compiler
on how I might want to generate code.
In fact this is really just a good way to check
on the compiler in order to make sure, well,
first off that you actually did enable an
optimization for that particular function
because un-optimized code looks a lot different than
optimized code once you've seen it a couple of times
and also, you know, make sure that a particular way you
wrote your code wasn't a pathological case for the compiler
that caused it to generate something
that was really ugly and slow just
because of the way you happen to write your syntax.
Now of course assembly view is great but I for one don't
bother to memorize every last one of those assembly line
which is pneumonics and I actually
do use assembly on a regular basis.
So for most of us what you're going to want
to do is pick an instruction of interest
and click on this little ASM help button down in the lower
right corner and what will happen is this window will pop up
and it will have the actual pages from
the architectural reference manual paged
up to the page describing the instruction you're looking
at so you can actually tell what that
move SS really means in real life.
Now I'm going to take a small tangent in here for
a moment to mention one other key feature of Shark is
that once you have these session windows as we
call them you can actually save them at anytime.
The most obviously just too simply save all the samples but
optionally we can also embed all the symbols and source code
from your program into the file
right along with sample information.
Now this is optional if you're
worried about security or so on
when you try to do this savings circle will
actually prominent you, "Do you actually really want
to save the symbols with it" and so you can so no if you're
concerned about someone else seeing your code or symbols
or what not but if you do put them in you can
then examine them later or if you don't put them
in you can maybe decide later on that, "Yea, I actually
did want to see my symbols, that person is legitimate,
they can see the code;" so you can go up to
the file menu choose the symbolic 8 command
and actually go and add them back in later.
Shark will take them from your binary and beyond the
basic obvious just saving a session away so you can look
at it next week this has many other
very useful applications.
For example you may have a performance problem which
you find in the code written by someone else halfway
across your company; well you can take the Shark
session, package it up, send it to them in e-mail saying,
"Hey this is your code, could you tell me why this so slow
and maybe tweak it and optimize it for me" or you can,
if you have an issue say that you don't time
to do it right now but for the next dot release
of your product you'll have some time to
deal with it, you can save this as sort
of a documentation of a future thing you might want to do.
Another great application is that if your
users go and use Shark on your application
after they've run their own data set with it they
may have a data set which of course you didn't have
at the time you were developing the application; they may
use Shark and find a performance problem that you missed
and they can actually take the Shark sessions, package them
up, send them into you, you can add the symbols afterwards
and figure out your performance problem using
the data from their code, their data set.
Also the Shark sessions are great to put in bug reports and
one last note is that these sessions are crossed platform
so if you have a mixed house with both X86 and power PC Macs
anybody can look at the session made on any of those Mac,
no problem; they go back and forth seamlessly.
So in order to illustrate how time profile works
I'm going to go and give you a quick demo here
on how we can use time profile to optimize
a very simple MPEG decode application.
In order to make this I just simply went to the internet and
got the reference in MPEG 2 decode off of the internet site.
So going here to the first demo machine, here's the
simple application, here's Shark's window up here above.
So what I'm going to do with my little reference
application here is I'm going to start up a little movie
of a guy pedaling around his lab and you
know, "hey this is going pretty fast."
One thing I did was unlike most video decoders I just
simply let the processor go as fast as it possibly could;
it's not stopping at a fixed frame rate and so we're seeing
how fast the processor can actually decode this information
at full blast and he's going pretty fast.
You might think, "Oh great, no problem we don't really
need to optimize this" but you need to really think
about it well 1 this is a pretty small movie,
fits in on a small portion of the screen
and 2 this is a really high end 3 giga hertz Mac
Pro down here and well a lot of people out there
in the field are going to have their laptops or older
machines and so on and this is occupying an entire processor
on this 3 gigahertz machine in order to
get this guy riding around like this.
So in reality we probably want to optimize this to account
for those other systems or for potentially larger movies.
So what we're going to want to do is use Shark
on this; so I'll go up here to the Shark window
and I've choose time profile option, first one on the menu,
and I'm going to choose to look in at just at my process,
the MPEG 2 decode process which I can
choose from this menu off to the right.
I've chosen that and press start.
Shark makes this little beep and you can see
down here at the bottom the icon turn bright red
when it's sampling and...this is a pretty simply
application...I think I've probably sampled enough
so I'm going to go ahead and stop it.
So you can see that bar went up and Shark
in order to avoid impacting the performance
of your application only does the analysis in actually
sorting out what was executed when after we pressed stop;
it just simply takes the samples while we're doing the
measurement and all the heavy analysis work is saved
until afterwards; this is purely to keep your
program, to keep the overhead as low as possible.
So now we've got this time profile window brought up and we
can go in and zoom in on that and what we can see here is
that we've got an obvious heavy hitter routine, this
reference IDC routine that came right up to the top.
So it looks like that's probably where we're going to
want to spend most of our time doing our optimization
but before I do that what might be good is to
go ahead, Shark put up this little button here
with an exclamation point on it; it's offering a
hint and this is in a function that's pretty high up;
it's only the fourth one down taking almost 11% of the
time; so you might want to go ahead and check out this hint
and basically what Shark is offering here is that this is
the fore function of the math library and well, you know,
here's a little short bit of code you might
consider in-lining in your program in order
to avoid calling the floor function so much and all
the overhead associated with making a function call.
So, hey it's pretty simple and quick and easy for us to
cut and paste a little bit of code in our application so,
heck, it's not the top function but why not.
So if we can go back and in our application we've already
done this and I've got several copies of the same movie
so that we can show them simultaneously here and
showing these two, well you can see that when we put
in this fast floor, we changed the floor command, we're
getting a little performance boost, you know, 10 or 15%,
somewhere in that vicinity which is not too impressive
but on the other hand all we had to do is copy
and paste a little bit of code so for just a few minutes of
work this is pretty good but if we actually want to go back
and look at that reference site,
(inaudible) I think we can do better.
So go ahead and close this.
Going back in and looking at our profile again let's
go in and actually look at the reference IDCT routine.
I'll go and double click on that, we'll
go to the code browser and look at that;
so what we're seeing here it this routine is our code
and you can see how the, in the whole function here,
there's one area over here in the scroll bar
where we're having our various hot lines;
it's all in this function reference IDCT and
we can go in; it has a couple of hot loops here
where we're spending our time but it's
all in this very one small function.
So we went in and spent a day or so looking at this
and you know what is happening is it's taking a bunch
of short integers in, converting them to floating
point doubles, doing a whole bunch of math
on it's floating point doubles and then outputting back
to the short integers, the same variable it came in.
So, you know, there's a whole lot of overhead involved with
converting back and forth between integer and floating point
and also floating point math is slower than integer math.
So what if we can convert this to integer math
in order to avoid all this excess overhead?
So this is the really hot place in the program
where a little bit of overhead goes a long way.
So what we can do, what we did here is let's go ahead and
we went in and changed this code to integer code instead
and the code is a little uglier with integers
because integer math is not quite as,
you have to do a little bit more work with
that, but after we just change this one function
to use integers all the way you can see that now we're
going a frame rate which is nearly twice as fast.
He's now boogying around that lab with pretty good
abandon and we can see that just by changing one function
in the whole program and this is code I didn't write
so the rest of it I don't even know what it does.
I didn't pay any attention to it.
You know, that's pretty good for going in
and tweaking one function but if we go in
and look at this a little more...you
can see that in...let's see,
if we go in and look at the code browser here is the actual
assembly code and...on this particular Mac it's not wanting
to show it to me; back at the office when I did this right
up here on this function it had a hint here and so I clicked
on it and it said, "Hey you might want to consider
using SIMD functions in this particular function;
so it's doing a lot of very regular mathematics.
So I went ahead and took that hint and say, "Well this
does look like a good opportunity for SIMD instructions,"
they're kind of designed for video coding work and
I said, "Well sure, let's go ahead and put those in"
and so let's make a third copy of him
with this converted to SIMD instructions.
So now the third version you can see here, well he's
going a little bit faster but it's really not that much.
It's maybe another 10% or something which considering
all the what we heard about the SIMD instructions it's
like they're doing like 4 rate operations at
once, sometimes even 16 operations at once,
shouldn't we be seeing like a 4 rate
or 16X improvement not just 10%.
This is where our intuition is starting to fail us again.
So this is where intuition starts to fail us,
it's a good time to go back and use Shark.
So we can go back and do another Shark profile...yea,
that's probably enough...Shark will analyze our
samples for us now and toss up a new window.
So, I go in and zoom in on this...well the first problem
I'm seeing is that I actually left all those windows open
so when I sampled my decoder I actually saw everything
and I was leaving those up there for the demo.
Actually, no, Shark has a solution to this; down here at the
bottom you'll see we actually have these menus so as well
as focusing in before we start we can
actually do some post run focusing.
So I can actually choose both the process
and in this case a thread of interest.
So we can see we have our main thread which is doing
the GUI application and we have a thread for each
of the different decoders, each of
which is getting a balanced amount
of time, about a third of the execution time.
So I can go in and look at these and that is the
integer version...this is the vectorized version
and here is the...oh yea here is our original one
and you can see that the original one has a breakdown
if we just look at the thread, almost exactly identical
to what we saw before with the original analysis
with the reference ICD routine running up to the top.
Let's go back and look at that vectorized one.
So if we go back and look at just this vectorized
one the problem that immediately rears it's ugly head;
here is the IDCT down here; it's number 6 in line
now; so basically we were playing whack a mole again;
we'd beaten down this operation a whole
bunch; it's now nice and short and efficient.
So instead what's the problem is these other routines
which popped up and are now the new heavy hitters
in our program since we optimized the IDCT.
So in order to actually optimize our
program and get it to go faster we're going
to have to go in and optimize these instead.
So, I will skip forward through all the different potential
steps there of actually going and optimizing those
and we went and most of all these were also
amendable to vectorization just like the IDCT was.
So, I went in and applied vectorization to pretty much all
these heavy hitter routines and after doing all those
about 4 I believe, went in and got the motion compensation,
color space conversion, pixel interpolation and so on,
all these vectors; now we can see that with just these
top 4 or 5 routines optimized he is now really boogying
around that lab; I don't know, someone clearly lit a
fire under him and you can see just with by going in
and using Shark to find and isolate and give us
hints on how to optimize just a handful of functions
in this actually fairly large program, most of which consist
of code which is executed at start up and never again;
we were able to go in and just with one engineer
for a few days go and optimize this program
so it's nearly a 6X performance boost and if we could switch
back to the slides; you can see here that with our baseline
of 1 time the fast floor operation just
in a few minutes we got an additional 15%.
When we switched to the integer IDCT with about a days
work or so we were able to get nearly 2X performance boost;
vector IDCT added a little bit but as it turns out
that we had already gotten most of the benefit just
by converting integer and then back taking that and
going to just a few more functions, about 4 or so,
we were able to get almost 6X performance
improvement just with a few days, one person;
thanks to the fact that Shark was able
to point us right in at the issues.
So that's how to use Shark to look
at your CPU bound problems.
Next we're going to go in and look at how you can use it to
go in and look at system and threading interaction in order
to speed up how you're dealing with Mac OS X
or your multi threaded applications using
a tool we call system trace analysis.
For this we're going to bring up Mr. Ryan Du Bois.
( Applause )
>>Thank you Lance; as you said my name is Ryan
Dubois and I'm here to talk about system trace.
Let me get out of your way here.
So you guys just saw time profile, you saw all
about it, how it helps you boost the performance
of your CPU bound jobs; that's all well and good.
What if your application is more just I/O intensive
or maybe you just added multi threading
after you optimized the CPU work?
How about if you want to understand the virtual memory
behavior of your application; what do you use then?
You could probably use time profile but it might not
be as helpful as system trace; let's find out why.
So time profile as Lance showed
you interrupts your application
at a predetermined interval; it figures out what it's doing.
Let's say for example here this
blue block of code on the left there
of execution what if that was VM call or system call.
You'll notice that time profile completely missed it.
To this end we've created system trace which is
an exact trace of operating system entry and exit;
this will catch everything like
system calls, VM faults, interrupts,
and it'll catch all the threads running on your system.
The really beautiful part about this is you don't have
to add any instrumentation to your application just
like with time profile but if you did want to you could add
sign posts and we'll talk a little bit about those later.
When you first take a system trace you have 3 views.
The first view here is a summary view, there's
also the trace view and the timeline view.
Let's dive into each one of these.
You look at the summary view, the top right there,
it gives you kind of an overall
breakdown; how many CPUs are on the system?
How much total CPU time?
Was it user, was it system, was it busy, was it idle?
To go even further the pie chart in the upper left breaks
it down even more to user code, system calls, VM faults,
interrupts and idle time and down below
that you'll notice there's 3 more tabs.
These are more detailed summaries.
First one here is the scheduler summary.
This is a basic overall statistical
summary of the thread scheduling behavior.
Down on the bottom right you kind pick the
different metrics you're interested in;
there's busy time, user time, system time, and priority.
This will give you kind of a min/average/max breakdown of
how much time your threads are getting and in what metric.
The next tab over is the system call; you'll notice this
looks a lot like a time profile and in fact it kind of is.
It's a profile of your system calls.
Down at the bottom just like with the time profile
you can switch the view between tree and heavy
and opening the disclosure triangles allows you to tie the
system call time directly to your user space application.
The same thing for VM faults over here;
again open the disclosure triangles,
tie your VM fault time directly to your user space code.
The next main view that we talked about was the trace
view; this is the complete view of traced events.
It allows you to inspect a call
stack, the arguments and return values
of every system call that's made during the system trace and
similarly for VM faults allows you to inspect the address
and the size and the call stack where they happened.
If you were to double click on any one of
these events it will take you to that event
in the timeline view; so it looks like this.
Timeline view and the most obvious
part of it is the timeline;
basically every row there corresponds
to one thread of execution.
Total colored bars are time that that
thread was actually executing on a CPU;
within these colored bars we'll draw icons
for system calls, the M faults, interrupts.
Speaking of system calls if you were to click on one like
this one you'd get an inspector that looks like this, list,
the system call name, the call stack, how you got there.
The first 4 or 5 arguments and the
return value and in the lower left
of that inspector you'll see how much
time was actually executed on the CPU
and how much time it was waiting, possibly on resources.
You can zoom in on this using the top slider there
just like you can with the chart view in time profile
and the bottom scroll bar behaves just like
you would expect, just scroll through time.
You can filter this display just like with
time profile based on the process, the thread,
the CPU and you can even turn on and
off the different classes of icons.
In case you're not interested in
system calls you can turn them off.
Now we offer 3 different ways to color
this view that allows a more kind
of instantly visually interpretable way to look at this.
The first one seen here is colored by CPU so each on of
the colored rectangles is colored according to the CPU
on which it was executing and what you can do with
this is at a glance identify your work or threads
and make sure they're showing the processes correctly.
So you'll notice here these top 4 threads are NobleApe.
The processor called NobleApe and just
by looking over here in this section
and seeing the 4 different colors we can verify visually
that all 4 worker threads are showing
the CPUs as we would expect.
Now if you look a little bit further to the right
you notice they're not sharing as well anymore;
2 of them are kind of arguing over which
CPU they want and just by looking down
and finding the color that's missing we can see that
one of the hour glass threads has stolen that CPU.
The other way that you can color this is by priority.
This is that same system trace; we
just switched the coloring to priority.
The red down here are for the iTunes and
NobleApe threads, denotes high priority.
For these hourglass threads the blue denotes low priority
and finally you can color by the context which reason
so this allows you to kind of visually
interpret why these threads switched.
Let's go break down this timeline view even more.
Like a said, these colored rectangles,
these are run intervals.
The little gray lines on the ends of
the run interval represent a context
which to a different thread on the same CPU.
Within these run intervals we draw the icons like
I said; here you can see a normal system call;
a little black underline represents how
much time that system call actually took.
If you look up above you can see a system
call that causes a thread to block;
again that black underline represents how much time
that system call took and similarly we'll draw icons
for page faults; again black underlines
how much time that page fault took.
If you were to click on one of these run intervals you'd
see an inspector much like this with list of thread,
the process to which it belonged, how much time
was user time, how much time was system time
and importantly the context which reasons.
So you can click on each one of
these and inspect it individually.
Now we'll add icons to this; like I said, you saw
some system calls but what do they really mean.
Well there's 4 system call icons
that you'll see in a timeline
The red phone denotes BSD system calls; these are you
POSIX APIs, things that allow you to talk to devices
and an abstract way, that sort of a thing.
The blue phone are mock system calls basic
services like ports, locks, tasks and threads.
Speaking of locks a subset of these
will be represented with the lock icon;
this will happen for any pthread mutex
lock call that ends up in a trap to the kernel.
So you can visually at a glance identify lock intention in
your system and the green phone here represent MIG messages;
these are mock interface generator
routines more low level stuff.
We'll also draw events for virtual memory.
For those of you not familiar with virtual
memory it takes your physical memory divides it
into small 4 kilobit chunks called pages and moves these in
and out of physical memory on demand
in a process called faulting.
There are 5 types of faults on OS 10.
The page in, the page is brought from the disk into
physical memory, that's represented by a green up arrow.
Page out with a red down arrow, pages taken from physical
memory pushed out to disk because it's no longer used.
Zero fill has a little 0 there, just a
new page you got marked 0 fill on demand;
the first time you touch it, it fills it with 0.
Copy on right fault with the clever cow icon...these
are shared pages so say you do a process fork,
all your pages are marked copy on right
so when the new process goes to write
onto those pages it gets a whole new copy and
finally the check mark is the page cache hit.
This means that the page is actually resident in physical
memory but it's just not mapped into your process.
We'll also display icons for hardware interrupts from
anything of from I/O operations, DNA operations,
even the clock interrupts that enforce the time
quantum and as I said before you can add signposts
to your system trace; it would show up like this.
There are 2 main types of signposts; the first type is a
point signpost; you can think of this like a tracer bullet
or a print F, you application kind of raises
its hand and says, "Hey this is what I'm doing."
The other type is an interval signpost;
these have a beginning and an end record;
they'll be represented with the little black under bar
just like the system calls them in VM faults you just saw.
With each one of these events you can record auxiliary data
values, anything you want and you can add these directly
to your code both user land and
driver code anywhere you want.
You can come find us after the talk in the labs and
check out the Shark manual to find out how to do that.
So now I'd like to expand upon Lance's demo where we've
already optimized an application using time profile
and we added some multi threading as kind of
a first pass; let's take it one step further
and let's see what system trace tells us, see if
we can squeeze out a little bit more performance.
So we're going to be working with an application
today called NobleApe; it looks like this.
It's just a basic simulation, each one of the little
red dots represents an ape running around on an island.
Up right here you have the little simulation
of the ape brain; you'll notice it keeps track
of ape thoughts per second; that's
are metric we're going to focus on.
So when we originally looked at this code it was a
completely single threaded scale in implementation,
some of you may be familiar with this
already, gets about 2008 thoughts per second.
So in the past we've gone through and we've optimized it
with vector code using time profile just as Lance showed you
and that gets us up to around 12,008 thoughts per second and
we even went one step further and these are 4 core machines
up here so the other 3 right now are just kind of idle.
So adding multi threading that gets us up around
the neighborhood of 25,000 ape thoughts per second;
that's pretty good coming from 2,000 but I have a suspicion
that we might be able to take it a little bit further.
So what we're going to do now is just leave this
running; we're going to take a system trace with Shark;
again all I do is poke the start button, let
it go for a little bit, poke the stop button.
We'll go ahead and pause NobleApe here.
So this system trace comes up; it's got
the same things I just walked you through.
It has the basic summary up here in the
right; on the left you have the pie chart.
You notice most of the time is in the user code; this
is expected and you know we want it to be calculating
and not doing a bunch of blocking stuff but you also notice
the second major chunk there, it's just sitting idle;
that's the time we're going to and break into.
We're going to try and get some more idle time.
Let's go look at the timeline.
Here's the timeline; the window menu show advanced
settings allows you to play with the coloring
so you can see the different coloring schemes here.
You can zoom in just by clicking and dragging.
So we're going to go color by CPU.
Now these are the worker threads here, these top 4
and we can look like I said at a glance right here
and just determine that they're sharing all
4 CPUs as we would expect; so that's good;
that's not the problem; they're not blocking on each other.
Let's go back to the summary view here.
Let's focus in on NobleApe.
You'll notice down on the right
here we've selected busy time.
These 4 here, these are the worker threads that are
doing the calculation and upon first inspection one thing
that really jumps out to me is the average amount of busy
time that each one of these gets is less than a millisecond.
Now the time slicing quantum on OS X is 10
milliseconds so these are CPU bound threads;
they are using less than one-tenth of
the amount time they've been given.
So if we can break into that, get some
more busy time on average for each one
of these threads we could probably
get some more ape thoughts per second.
So we're going to use that, the average
busy time as one of our metrics.
Let's go figure out why they're blocking.
We're going to go to system calls
here; we're going to open this,
this little icon in the bottom right allows
us to see the heaviest call stack there.
I'm a little bit familiar with this code because I've looked
at it now but once you get down to NobleApe you'll see,
you'll get to something called NPtaskWrapper.
So I went in, I found that code over in NobleApe
and this was the original implementation;
kind of like what you'd expect basic worker thread
model, you know, wait on a request queue do some stuff
and post to a results queue, makes sense.
Inspect it a little bit further, walk through the
code a little bit and this variable here for each one
of these worker threads they're 8 troops globally and there
are 4 worker threads and we just divide the work up evenly.
So each one of these worker threads in only cycling
through 2 troops before it's posting
to the queue and going to sleep again.
That's not a lot of work for these guys to do and obviously
as you just saw it's not filling up the time quan.
So this is the first pass, all I simply
did was just go ahead and double the amount
of apes on the island and see what that does.
Get it back in to vector threaded
mode...that's a little bit higher now;
it's breaking into the 28s, hanging around 26 mostly.
We got a little bit of a boost there.
Let's go ahead and take another system trace.
( Pause )
Let Shark do its thing; again we're going to focus on
NobleApe, open up these and look at the worker threads.
Look at that; we took it from the around 700 or
800 microseconds on average up to 1.3 milliseconds;
so we're breaking into it; this is a good start.
A couple of other things to try are if
you remember this loop here we can go
through that loop twice before we post the results;
you're just calculating thoughts and
changing some parameters on the ape.
So let's go ahead and do that; let's walk through
this loop a couple of times over our amount of apes
that we've been given and then post the results after that.
So I went ahead and did that; went back to the original
amount of apes, doubled the amount of times we go
through that loop; let's see what that
does to our ape thoughts per second.
( Pause )
It looks like it's getting a little
bit higher there, hovering around 28,
29 breaking up into the 30s; that's not bad.
Similarly we do another system trace.
( Pause )
Let it process the samples and let's
go look at that other metric again.
Still about the same; okay so that's...that's not too
bad but we could even break into this even further.
So I went through this cycle a bit more, found out that
I could double the number of apes and double the number
of cycles and do them simultaneously and get a big
boost but I just went ahead and I went crazy with it.
I said, "You know, why don't we
just do 8 of these synchronization,
8 of these thought cycles per synchronization
and let's double the number of apes
and let's see how many ape thoughts per second we can get.
( Pause )
So we went ahead and did that, let this computer average for
a while...there we go...and we've broken into the 40s now;
@
we're hovering around forty two, 41,000
ape thoughts per second up from about 25.
%
Let's go ahead and take one final system trace
and let's see what our other metric is doing;
let's see how those run intervals are going.
Focus in on NobleApe, go check the worker
threads, look at that; on average we're up in 5
to 6 millisecond range, up from 600 microseconds.
So here what you've seen is how to build upon what you've
done with time profile in your multi threaded applications.
You've gone in and you've optimized all your
CPU work loops to make them as fast as possible.
System trace allows you to do that for your multi threading.
It allows you to identify where the overhead is,
see how much time you worker threads are
getting on average and increase that.
Let's go ahead and go back to the slides.
( Pause )
So in review when I did this Mac at work these
are the results that I got; so what do we do?
Well first we ran NobleApe, we identified our one
metric we wanted to improve, the ape thoughts per second.
We went in with system trace, we saw what it was doing, we
identified the short run interval for the worker threads.
From there we used the system called summary view
there to identify key point in our code to rethink,
attempted a few really simple, really quick
optimizations; we got around a 1.7X speed up in
about 15 minutes of actual work; that's not bad.
So now you've seen time profile
for optimizing your CPU bound jobs.
You've seen system trace for optimizing
your multi threaded and system interaction.
These are just 2 of the many options that Shark allows
you to do for profiling your applications and here to talk
about some of the other options for
profiling with Shark is Rick Altherr.
( Applause )
>>Thanks Ryan.
So like Ryan said we've talked about system trace, we've
talked about time profile, let's talk about a few others.
So what's a common theme in applications today?
Well they start using a lot of memory; this can
have some pretty adverse affects; you can, you know,
run out of memory, you can be using enough memory
that the operating system has a hard time managing it.
Well how can we take a look and
see what's going on memory wise?
Well for Shark we have Malloc tracing.
So we can actually trace all the allocation
events that happen, this is both allocations
and frees so we trace both C, C++,
new Malloc free,
delete and we actually create an
exact trace of all these events.
This way we can look at a variety of statistics.
Now what you get when you collect one of
these is what looks like a time profile.
In fact we even sort it by the same type of statistics; the
number of allocation events that happen in each function.
You can also go to the source level and look at allocations
per source line but we also added an extra column
and this tells you the actual size of the allocations.
Now this is a summation of all of the
allocations that happened in this function.
This is really useful to find runaway functions where
you're allocating things in a loop and you can say, "Well,
you know, I allocated 50 megs in one function; perhaps
I should go through and think about that for a second."
You can also go to the chart view and look at this in
more of a behavioral sense; instead of looking at "well
where am I doing lots of allocations" you can
look at what's the overall behavior of my program.
So you get the normal chart view that time profile
gives you but you also get a secondary view
that illustrates the change in heap size.
So bars going above the zero line are allocations and
lines going below the zero line are actually frees.
So you can look and at a glance see the pattern
of my application is allocate, allocate, allocate,
free and you can also see I allocate a whole bunch and
I freed very little which indicates that you have leaks.
Now another area that has become more interesting
over time is Java and virtual machines.
Traditional profilers like time profile
and system trace look at compiled code.
They look at what is the native machine actually
executing; this is great for lots of things;
in fact it's great for looking at the
virtual machine itself but what if you want
to look at what the virtual machine is running?
Well with Shark we've actually implemented hooks into the VM
so that we can actually lift you out of the native machine
into the virtual machine and see
this is what my code is doing.
So what do we offer in terms of Java support?
Well for time profile looks exactly like an old
time profile, has the same features, same display,
same data mining capabilities; it just happens to show you,
"Hey this is the Java class that I'm actually working with,
this is the method I'm in, this is the package it's in."
This also will take you directly to the source code;
you get all the exact same features just for Java.
Well for another type that we haven't talked about
before but this is what we call a call trace.
Now this is an exact trace of every method, entry
and exit that happens while you
actually take a trace of your program.
Now this is quite invasive and will make your application
considerably slower while you do it but if you really want
to know what your application does this will tell you.
It shows it in the exact same format; it's a time
profile style format and you can look and say, "Well,
I make lots of calls as function, I spend lots of
time in these functions and I know it exactly."
We also offer allocation tracing.
We watch for you memory allocations
by allocating objects in Java.
We also catch garbage collection events to catch
the frees and we display it in the exact same way
that you're used to with the Malloc trace.
We add the allocation size so you can even see
I'm allocating lots in this particular method.
We also offer even more techniques than what I just talked
about and we're going to cover these really briefly.
Sometimes you want to deal with early testing of binaries.
You know, perhaps you really haven't debugged your
application completely; it's really hard to get into a case
where you actually exhibit a performance
issue but you want to take a look anyway.
Well you can point Shark right at your binary on a disk,
not even run it and Shark can come back and give you a lot
of those hints about what you might be able to do
such as vectorizing your code or things like that
and you can do this without even running
the application; does it all statically.
Now in today's world you have lots of threads for doing lots
of different things; sometimes you think of doing everything
in parallel and sometimes they're
not, like you saw in system trace.
Well sometimes you're interested in what they're
not doing; specifically what they're blocked on
and system trace can be very useful for this but
another way of looking at this is saying, "Well okay,
it took 10 seconds on my watch and of that 10 seconds
how long was I blocked and where was I blocked?"
Well for profile called time profile all threads
states it's just like a normal time profile except
that we record not only execution time, time where you
were actually executing on the CPU but we also take time
where you were not executing in every
thread on the system simultaneously.
This is displayed as a normal time profile and
you can look at this for things like figuring
out why is my launch time slow for my application?
What am I actually waiting on to
happen during my application launch?
We also offer performance counter recording; we
can get OS X events from the operating system;
we can get counts from the processor, from
memory controllers on power PC systems
and we can actually look at things like L2 cache misses.
We can look at memory bandwidth; this way
if you suspect that you're actually running
into a hardware limitation you can
actually go in and look at this.
You can look at this in both a time profile type format
and also in a spreadsheet type format with charting
so that you can actually look at bandwidth overtime.
For more information about any of these techniques
please come see us in the lab after the session
and tomorrow we're looking at Shark documentation which
has full descriptions of all these different techniques.
Now for some other ways to start
and stop Shark back to Ryan.
( Applause )
Thank you Rick.
Alright, so by now hopefully you're all familiar with
the normal start button, the way to start and stop Shark;
super easy, you've got configurable hot key, really awesome.
The only down side here is it requires UI interaction
and it might show up in a really short time profile.
So let's talk about some other ways to
use Shark, some other ways to point it
at different processes and ways to trigger it.
( Pause )
An extension of process attach I last showed you is
process launch; say you want to profile the launch time
of your application; let it profile say preference
loading, plug in loading, that sort of a thing.
Go to process menu as you just saw,
pick launch, you'll get this menu here.
It has many options you can start sampling immediately;
this will start time profile before
the first instruction is ever executed.
You can give it user-supplied arguments
working directory and environment variables.
It's really perfect for really short live
applications like command mine tools.
It's also great for really large applications like
Photoshop; say you want to profile the plug in loading
and the preference checking at
start of time, that sort of a thing.
Some other things we can do.
What if the machine you're interested in is half way around
the world; no problem there; run Shark on the machine,
put it in network mode; you can point another Shark
at it on different computer using Bonjour or TCP/IP.
This allows you to simultaneously profile
multiple machines say in a parallel cluster.
You can have Shark running on all the different machines.
You can the remote configurations
on the fly; it's great for games,
headless servers, parallel clusters, that sort of thing.
We're all sadly familiar with the spinning pizza of death.
Why does it happen, how to get rid of
it, lot of times that's hard to answer.
The combination of time profiles all threads states
and unresponsive application profiling
is here to solve that question for you.
Anytime the spinning pizza of death pops up,
Shark will start taking a session for you.
A couple of awesome features; you can give it
application name filters, partial application name
or minimum hang threshold; say you're
only interested in stuff over a second.
What about if you've got it down to one function
or one hot loop in your program; that's cool too;
go in and add a couple of lines of
API to your code then you can start
and stop Shark from directly within your application.
There's a full example of this in the
Shark manual or you can find us in the lab.
This is really great for really fine grain
control of sampling; it's got the easy API.
The only downside here is you have to link with the CHUD
framework so it's not always the best for release stuff.
Similarly we have command line; so same kind of
API in the command line, put Shark in remote mode,
run these from the command line; it's good
for scripting stuff in remote log ins.
What if you don't have any UI?
There's also consult Shark.
Quickly we're running out of time.
I want to talk about something we introduced
last year called the window time facility.
You're normal profiling, you start, you stop, you get
all the samples in between; it's great for normal stuff.
What happens if you don't know
when your problems going to occur?
To that end we've made the window time facility;
it allows you to press stop or press start, sorry,
pick a sampling window and forget; go about trying
to reproduce your bug, as soon as it happens,
wait until it's done, you press stop and
Shark gives you that last window samples.
This is selectable with time profile, they're marked
in the config menu as you see here and it works
with any other methods that we've talked about before.
So in summary Shark is really easy; it allows you to
quickly identify exactly what code you need to optimize.
There's many different options available for different
types of tasks including hardware performance counters
and as you've just seen there's many different
ways to trigger and target these operations.
For more information send us an e-mail.